---
chapter: 03
title: "Beginnings of Modem Competition: Codex and Milgo 1956-1967"
order: 2
---

Starting a company does not always begin with a grand vision of the future. Sometimes the motivation can be wanting simply to do what one enjoys most. Other times it might be the unwillingness to work for others. More often it is some odd combination of reasoning and feeling that is less important that having acted, as if what else would one have done. Such was the case for Jim Cryer and Arthur Kohlenberg in 1962 when their employer, Melpar Electronics, informed them that they were closing the advanced research laboratory they had been running as director and chief scientist, respectively. Even though offered the option to move to Virginia, both men had little desire to leave the Boston area. Rather they believed that they could win technology development contracts being let by government agencies. So they incorporated a new company, Codex, and joined thousands of other companies swept up in the Federal government's funding of technology innovation.

The early 1960’s were a remarkable period for scientists and engineers with an entrepreneurial itch. Federal government funding for technological innovation seemed bottomless. Following President John F. Kennedy’s challenge in May 1961 to put a man on the moon, funding for advanced technologies surged again, adding to the sizable increases that began after World War II when military spending grew to counter the global threat of the USSR and communism. One of the most important investments in the history of information technologies was the Air Force’s SAGE (Semiautomatic Ground Environment) project; an air defense system undertaken in 1951 to detect Soviet aircraft coming over polar routes. [1] When the USSR launched Sputnik in October 1957, US fear shifted into over-drive. Science and engineering became instant national priorities. In 1958, the ARPA (Advanced Research Projects Agency) and NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) were created and monies flowed to technology as never before. Then came President Kennedy’s rallying vision in 1961. The large government defense contractors found themselves too busy to compete for every new contract, nor able to maintain technical superiority given the explosion in new technologies. Opportunities lay everywhere for a few scientists and engineers to form a company and win development contracts, even production orders. The Federal Government effectively boot-strapped technological innovation by playing both venture capital investor and ultimate customer.

Cryer and Kohlenberg knew just such an opportunity: the Air Force wanted better error-correcting codes for digital transmission over telephone lines. They also knew Robert Gallager, then a young professor at MIT, and his graduate student, Jim Massey, had developed new error-correcting techniques, thought a sure bet to secure a development contract. [2] Their instincts were right. Soon they had a contract to develop exotic error-correcting codes for the Air Force’s Ballistic Missile Early Warning System (BMEWS): the successor to SAGE. BMEWS generated radar data in Northern Canada that was then transmitted over telephone lines to computers in the States. The long telephone lines frequently experienced noise, or worse yet, power outages, that corrupted or destroyed the data being transmitted. Error-correcting codes were needed to restore the lost data. Better codes required more of the total capacity of the communication lines, or bandwidth, leaving less bandwidth for radar data. More powerful codes also stimulated the need for faster modems: the devices that transmit the discrete 0's and 1's of digital data, or information, over the continuously varying analog voltage of telephone lines. (See Exhibit 3.1.0 Modem.)

